Announcing Rust 1.82.0 (#1415)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2024-10-17-Rust-1.82.0.md

code.
<b><span style="color:#0A0">version:</span></b> 1.1.23 <b><span style="color:#A50">(latest 1.1.30)</span></b>
<b><span style="color:#0A0">license:</span></b> MIT OR Apache-2.0
<b><span style="color:#0A0">rust-version:</span></b> 1.63
<b><span style="color:#0A0">documentation:</span></b> https://docs.rs/cc
<b><span style="color:#0A0">homepage:</span></b> https://github.com/rust-lang/cc-rs
<b><span style="color:#0A0">repository:</span></b> https://github.com/rust-lang/cc-rs
<b><span style="color:#0A0">crates.io:</span></b> https://crates.io/crates/cc/1.1.23
<b><span style="color:#0A0">features:</span></b>
  jobserver = []
  parallel  = [dep:libc, dep:jobserver]
<b><span style="color:#0AA">note</span></b><b>:</b> to see how you depend on cc, run `<b><span style="color:#0AA">cargo tree --invert --package cc@1.1.23</span></b>`
</pre>

By default `cargo info` describes the package version in the local `Cargo.lock`, if any, but as you can see it will indicate when there's a newer version too, and `cargo info cc@1.1.30` would report on that. The feature list also indicates a `+` next to any that are enabled.

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

### Replacing `Captures` trick with `use<..>` syntax

Rust now supports `use<..>` syntax within certain impl Trait bounds to control which generic lifetime parameters are captured.

Return-position impl Trait (RPIT) types in Rust *capture* certain generic parameters.  Capturing a generic parameter allows that parameter to be used in the hidden type.  That in turn affects borrow checking.

In Rust 2021 and earlier editions, lifetime parameters are not captured in opaque types on bare functions and on functions and methods of inherent impls unless those lifetime parameters are mentioned syntactically in the opaque type.  E.g., this is an error:

```rust
//@ edition: 2021
fn f(x: &()) -> impl Sized { x }
```

```
error[E0700]: hidden type for `impl Sized` captures lifetime that does not appear in bounds
 --> src/main.rs:1:30
  |
1 | fn f(x: &()) -> impl Sized { x }
  |         ---     ----------   ^
  |         |       |
  |         |       opaque type defined here
  |         hidden type `&()` captures the anonymous lifetime defined here
  |
help: add a `use<...>` bound to explicitly capture `'_`
  |
1 | fn f(x: &()) -> impl Sized + use<'_> { x }
  |                            +++++++++
```

With the new `use<..>` syntax, we can fix this, as suggested in the error, by writing:

```rust
fn f(x: &()) -> impl Sized + use<'_> { x }
```

Previously, correctly fixing this class of error required defining a dummy trait, conventionally called `Captures`, and using it as follows:

```rust
trait Captures<T: ?Sized> {}
impl<T: ?Sized, U: ?Sized> Captures<T> for U {}

fn f(x: &()) -> impl Sized + Captures<&'_ ()> { x }
```

That was called "the `Captures` trick", and it was a bit baroque and subtle.  It's no longer needed.

There are some limitations to what is being stabilized.  The `use<..>` syntax cannot currently appear within traits or within trait impls, and it must list all in-scope generic type and const parameters.  We hope to lift these restrictions over time.

Note that in Rust 2024, the example above will "just work" without needing `use<..>` syntax (or any tricks).  This is because in the new edition, opaque types will automatically capture all lifetime parameters in scope.  This is a better default, and we've seen a lot of evidence about how this cleans up code.  In Rust 2024, `use<..>` syntax will serve as an important way of opting-out of that default.

For more details about `use<..>` syntax, capturing, and how this applies to Rust 2024, see the ["RPIT lifetime capture rules"](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/edition-guide/rust-2024/rpit-lifetime-capture.html) chapter of the edition guide.  For details about the overall direction, see our recent blog post, ["Changes to `impl Trait` in Rust 2024"](2024-09-05-impl-trait-capture-rules.md).

````

Reviewer: Apologies in advance about the length; this is as short as I could make it.

Reviewer: Rust 1.82 is going to be an unusually large release in terms of user-facing things, so it probably makes sense it will be a longer-than-usual blog post.

Author: I think the problem here, starting from the section title, is that the "`Captures` trick" is (per RFC 3498) "not widely known, and its purpose is not commonly well understood." So I think a title like "Precise capturing with `use<>` syntax" would be more accessible, and it also needs to motivate why I shouldn't just use `+ '_`, **especially** because that's what previous versions recommended for that same example!

AIUI, the problem with outlives is that it may force an unnecessary bound on type parameters, like `T: 'a`, whereas `use<'a, T>` lets those remain independent. Is that right?

Reviewer: Yes, I think in an earlier draft I'd titled the section...

```markdown
### Precise capturing `use<..>` syntax
```

...and that'd still be good.

I'll write something up about the `+ '_` bit.  I'd tried to avoid it here, as it gets somewhat detailed, but you're right about why it should be said.

Author: Ok, I've shuffled everything else around, but I left this out for now to await your update.

Thanks a lot for your help!

Author: BTW, I don't think the relative `md` link for the Changes post will work in the site generator, so that should use the published URL.

Reviewer: I incorporated the title change and mentioned the old compiler suggestion.  I'll try to make some other changes late too, but if not.... this would probably be OK given the links to RFC 3498 where this is discussed further.

> AIUI, the problem with outlives is that it may force an unnecessary bound on type parameters, like `T: 'a`, whereas `use<'a, T>` lets those remain independent. Is that right?

Yes... specifically think about invariant lifetimes where this ends up requiring the lifetimes be exactly equal, resulting in no good way for the caller to provide that.

Reviewer: I've now cleaned this up further, added an example of how `+ '_` doesn't work in general inspired by a real case in the compiler, and pushed this to the branch.

```rust
use std::convert::Infallible;
pub fn unwrap_without_panic<T>(x: Result<T, Infallible>) -> T {
    let Ok(x) = x; // the `Err` case does not need to appear
    x
}
```

This works with empty types such as a variant-less `enum Void {}`, or structs and enums with a visible empty field and no `#[non_exhaustive]` attribute. It will also be particularly useful in combination with the never type `!`, although that type is still unstable at this time.

There are still some cases where empty patterns must still be written. For reasons related to uninitialized values and unsafe code, omitting patterns is not allowed if the empty type is accessed through a reference, pointer, or union field:

```rust
pub fn unwrap_ref_without_panic<T>(x: &Result<T, Infallible>) -> &T {
    match x {
        Ok(x) => x,
        // this arm cannot be omitted because of the reference
        Err(infallible) => match *infallible {},
    }
}
```

To avoid interfering with crates that wish to support several Rust versions, `match` arms with empty patterns are not yet reported as “unreachable code” warnings, despite the fact that they can be removed.

### Floating-point NaN semantics and `const`

> Operations on floating-point values (of type `f32` and `f64`) are famously subtle. One of the reasons for this is the existence of "NaN values": this is short for "Not a Number", and is used to represent e.g. the result of `0.0 / 0.0`. What makes NaN values subtle is that more than one possible NaN value exists: a NaN value has a sign that can be checked with `f.is_sign_positive()`, and it has a "payload" that can be extracted with `f.to_bits()`. Despite very successful efforts to standardize the behavior of floating-point operations across hardware architectures, the details of when a NaN is positive or negative and what its exact payload is differ across architectures. To make matters even more complicated, Rust and its LLVM backend apply optimizations to floating-point operations when the exact numeric result is guaranteed not to change, but those optimizations can change which NaN value is produced. For instance, `f * 1.0` may be optimized to just `f`. However, if `f` is a NaN, this can change the exact bit pattern of the result!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Operations on floating-point values (of type `f32` and `f64`) are famously subtle. One of the reasons for this is the existence of "NaN values": this is short for "not a number", and is used to represent e.g. the result of `0.0 / 0.0`. What makes NaN values subtle is that more than one possible NaN value exists: a NaN value has a sign that can be checked with `f.is_sign_positive()`, and it has a "payload" that can be extracted with `f.to_bits()`. Despite very successful efforts to standardize the behavior of floating-point operations across hardware architectures, the details of when a NaN is positive or negative and what its exact payload is differ across architectures. To make matters even more complicated, Rust and its LLVM backend apply optimizations to floating-point operations when the exact numeric result is guaranteed not to change, but those optimizations can change which NaN value is produced. For instance, `f * 1.0` may be optimized to just `f`. However, if `f` is a NaN, this can change the exact bit pattern of the result!
```

For several years, the macros `std::ptr::addr_of!` and `std::ptr::addr_of_mut!` have served this purpose. Now the time has come to provide a proper native syntax for this operation: `addr_of!(expr)` becomes `&raw const expr`, and `addr_of_mut!(expr)` becomes `&raw mut expr`. For example:

```rust
#[repr(packed)]
struct Packed {
    not_aligned_field: i32,
}

fn main() {
    let p = Packed { not_aligned_field: 1_82 };

    // This would be undefined behavior!
    // It is rejected by the compiler.
    //let ptr = &p.not_aligned_field as *const i32;

    // This is the old way of creating a pointer.
    let ptr = std::ptr::addr_of!(p.not_aligned_field);

    // This is the new way.
    let ptr = &raw const p.not_aligned_field;

    // Accessing the pointer has not changed.
    // Note that `val = *ptr` would be undefined behavior because
    // the pointer is not aligned!
    let val = unsafe { ptr.read_unaligned() };
}
```

> The native syntax makes it more clear that the operand expression of these operators is interpreted as a [place expression](https://www.ralfj.de/blog/2024/08/14/places.html). It also avoids the term "address-of" when referring to the action of creating a pointer. A pointer is [more than just an address](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3559-rust-has-provenance.html), so Rust is moving away from terms like "address-of" that reaffirm a false equivalence of pointers and addresses.

Reviewer: This is a fairly large user-facing change.  I'd suggest moving this section further toward the top, perhaps after `use<..>`.

### Safely addressing unsafe `static`s

This code is now allowed:

```rust
static mut STATIC_MUT: Type = Type::new();
extern "C" {
    static EXTERN_STATIC: Type;
}
fn main() {

>      let static_mut_ptr = std::ptr::addr_of_mut!(STATIC_MUT);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     let static_mut_ptr = &raw mut STATIC_MUT;
```

Might as well use the new syntax here.

Author: I think the intention was to show that both ways are fine, but the later compatibility example also shows `addr_of_mut`, so I guess we don't need it here.

     let extern_static_ptr = &raw const EXTERN_STATIC;
}
```

In an expression context, `STATIC_MUT` and `EXTERN_STATIC` are [place expressions](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions.html#place-expressions-and-value-expressions). Previously, the compiler's safety checks were not aware that the raw ref operator did not actually affect the operand's place, treating it as a possible read or write to a pointer. No unsafety is actually present, however, as it just creates a pointer.

Relaxing this may cause problems where some unsafe blocks are now reported as unused if you deny the `unused_unsafe` lint, but they are now only useful on older versions. Annotate these unsafe blocks with `#[allow(unused_unsafe)]` if you wish to support multiple versions of Rust, as in this example diff:

```diff
 static mut STATIC_MUT: Type = Type::new();
 fn main() {
+    #[allow(unused_unsafe)]

>      let static_mut_ptr = unsafe { std::ptr::addr_of_mut!(STATIC_MUT) };

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     let static_mut_ptr = unsafe { &raw mut STATIC_MUT };
```

Author: This one should *not* change, because if you're writing code that's lint-compatible with older versions, then you can't use `&raw` yet either.

 }
```

A future version of Rust is expected to generalize this to other expressions which would be safe in this position, not just statics.

> 

Reviewer: ````suggestion

### Unsafe extern

Rust code can use functions and statics from foreign code.  The type signatures of these foreign items are provided in `extern` blocks.  Historically, all items within `extern` blocks have been unsafe to call, but we didn't have to write `unsafe` anywhere on the `extern` block itself.

However, if a signature within the `extern` block is incorrect, then using that item will result in undefined behavior.  Would that be the fault of the person who wrote the `extern` block, or the person who used that item?

We've decided that it's the responsibility of the person writing the `extern` block to ensure that all signatures contained within it are correct, and so we now allow writing `unsafe extern`:

```rust
unsafe extern {
    pub safe fn sqrt(x: f64) -> f64;
    pub unsafe fn strlen(p: *const u8) -> usize;
}
```

One benefit of this is that items within an `unsafe extern` block can be marked as safe to call.  In the above example, we can call `sqrt` without using `unsafe`.  Items that aren't marked with either `safe` or `unsafe` are conservatively assumed to be `unsafe`.

In future releases, we'll be encouraging the use of `unsafe extern` with lints.  Starting in Rust 2024, using `unsafe extern` will be required.

For further details, see [RFC 3484](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/3484-unsafe-extern-blocks.md) and the ["Unsafe extern blocks"](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/edition-guide/rust-2024/unsafe-extern.html) chapter of the edition guide.

````

Reviewer: Unsafe extern is another major user-visible addition in Rust 1.82.  I'd put this ahead of unsafe attributes, and move it further up along with unsafe attributes.

Author: Maybe we can raise the `safe` part in the section title? That's a big benefit IMO, and I missed it at first glance. How about "Unsafe extern and safe calls"?

Reviewer: Good point.  Maybe "Unsafe extern and safe items".

Reviewer: Or maybe more pithily, "Safe items in unsafe extern".

### Unsafe attributes

Some Rust attributes, such as [`no_mangle`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/abi.html#the-no_mangle-attribute), can be used to [cause Undefined Behavior without any `unsafe` block](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/28179). If this was regular code we would require them to be placed in an `unsafe {}` block, but so far attributes have not had comparable syntax. To reflect the fact that these attributes can undermine Rust's safety guarantees, they are now considered "unsafe" and should be written as follows:

```rust
#[unsafe(no_mangle)]
pub fn my_global_function() { }
```

> The old form of the attribute (without `unsafe`) is currently still accepted, but might be linted against at some point in the future, and will be a hard error in a future edition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The old form of the attribute (without `unsafe`) is currently still accepted, but might be linted against at some point in the future, and will be a hard error in Rust 2024.  For further details, see the ["Unsafe attributes"](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/edition-guide/rust-2024/unsafe-attributes.html) chapter of the edition guide.
```

This affects the following attributes:
- `no_mangle`
- `link_section`

> - `export_name`

Reviewer: This too is a fairly large user-facing change.  Maybe let's move this up after the section about `&raw`.

> - `export_name`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `export_name`

For further details, see the ["Unsafe attributes"](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/edition-guide/rust-2024/unsafe-attributes.html) chapter of the edition guide.
```

For example, here's what you could see for `cargo info cc`:

<pre>
<b><span style="color:#0A0">cc</span></b> <b><span style="color:#0AA">#build-dependencies</span></b>
A build-time dependency for Cargo build scripts to assist in invoking the native
C compiler to compile native C code into a static archive to be linked into Rust
code.
<b><span style="color:#0A0">version:</span></b> 1.1.23 <b><span style="color:#A50">(latest 1.1.30)</span></b>
<b><span style="color:#0A0">license:</span></b> MIT OR Apache-2.0
<b><span style="color:#0A0">rust-version:</span></b> 1.63
<b><span style="color:#0A0">documentation:</span></b> https://docs.rs/cc
<b><span style="color:#0A0">homepage:</span></b> https://github.com/rust-lang/cc-rs
<b><span style="color:#0A0">repository:</span></b> https://github.com/rust-lang/cc-rs
<b><span style="color:#0A0">crates.io:</span></b> https://crates.io/crates/cc/1.1.23
<b><span style="color:#0A0">features:</span></b>
  jobserver = []
  parallel  = [dep:libc, dep:jobserver]
<b><span style="color:#0AA">note</span></b><b>:</b> to see how you depend on cc, run `<b><span style="color:#0AA">cargo tree --invert --package cc@1.1.23</span></b>`
</pre>

> By default `cargo info` describes the package version in the local `Cargo.lock`, if any, but as you can see it will indicate when there's a newer version too, and `cargo info cc@1.1.30` would report on that. The feature list also indicates a `+` next to any that are en

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default `cargo info` describes the package version in the local `Cargo.lock`, if any, but as you can see it will indicate when there's a newer version too, and `cargo info cc@1.1.30` would report on that. The feature list also indicates a `+` next to any that are enabled.
```

> By default `cargo info` describes the package version in the local `Cargo.lock`, if any, but as you can see it will indicate when there's a newer version too, and `cargo info cc@1.1.30` would report on that. The feature list also indicates a `+` next to any that are enabled.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
By default, `cargo info` describes the package version in the local `Cargo.lock`, if any, but as you can see, it will indicate when there's a newer version too, and `cargo info cc@1.1.30` would report on that. The feature list also indicates a `+` next to any that are enabled by default.
```

Author: I think we're getting too many clauses in that sentence -- how about this?
```suggestion
By default, `cargo info` describes the package version in the local `Cargo.lock`, if any. As you can see, it will indicate when there's a newer version too, and `cargo info cc@1.1.30` would report on that. The feature list also indicates a `+` next to any that are enabled by default.
```

Regarding the features "by default", I'm actually surprised that this doesn't look at local enablement, but I just verified it's the same even if I have `default-features=false` in my dep. Using an `indexmap` dep, it looks like the actual list is just `+default`, plain white text without `+` for other features enabled by default (`std`), and gray text for remaining features (even if they are locally enabled). Maybe we should remove this feature sentence altogether?

Author: ```suggestion
By default, `cargo info` describes the package version in the local `Cargo.lock`, if any. As you can see, it will indicate when there's a newer version too, and `cargo info cc@1.1.30` would report on that.
```

### Apple target promotions

> #### macOS on ARM64 is now Tier 1

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
#### macOS on AArch64 is now Tier 1
```

So, this is an awkward one. Pretty much everywhere *Rust* refers to this architecture, we[^1] call it "aarch64". *Apple* appears to use "arm64" in code paths and "Apple Silicon" in user-facing / marketing venues.

For the purpose of this, a Rust-specific blog post, I think we should primarily refer to the architecture as `aarch64` if it's code or "AArch64" if it's human talk (according to [the Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AArch64)). We should then extend the aliases section below to mention "ARM64".

[^1]: If I recall correctly, this was basically a unilateral decision on my part to better match our existing targets.

Author: On the other hand, our [platform support](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/rustc/platform-support.html) page consistently uses "ARM64" in the target "notes" descriptions, and there are also a few in triples: T2 `arm64ec-pc-windows-msvc`, T3 `arm64e-apple-{darwin,ios,tvos}` and `arm64_32-apple-watchos`.

The [Rust 1.49.0](https://blog.rust-lang.org/2020/12/31/Rust-1.49.0.html) announcement spelled out "64-bit ARM" for both Linux and macOS -- would that be acceptable to you here?

Reviewer 4: > spelled out "64-bit ARM"

That'd OK. At least we skip picking one name or the other.

> consistently uses "ARM64"

It may be relevant that Wikipedia redirects `ARM64` to the aforementioned `AArch64` page, and only uses "ARM64" once as an "also known as". Perhaps we should follow suit?

> and there are also a few in triples: T2 `arm64ec-pc-windows-msvc`, T3 `arm64e-apple-{darwin,ios,tvos}`

To my limited knowledge arm64**e** and arm64**ec** are ABIs, not processor architectures. It may be a sign they should not be present there in these target triple?

> and `arm64_32-apple-watchos`.

The same may be true for `arm64_32`?

Author: > > spelled out "64-bit ARM"
> 
> That'd be OK. At least we skip picking one name or the other.

At the very least, I think this is not time or place to litigate it. :) I'll make the change.

> The Rust target `aarch64-apple-darwin` for macOS on ARM64 (M1-family or later Apple Silicon CPUs) is now a tier 1 target, indicating our highest guarantee of working properly. As the [platform support](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/rustc/platform-support.html) page describes, every change in the Rust repository must pass full tests on every tier 1 target before it can be merged. This ARM64 target was added to tier 2 back in Rust 1.49, making it available in `rustup`, and this new milestone raises it on par with ARM64 Linux and the X86 macOS, Linux, and Windows targets.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Rust target `aarch64-apple-darwin` for macOS on AArch64 (also known as ARM64 or Apple Silicon) is now a tier 1 target, indicating our highest guarantee of working properly. As the [platform support](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/rustc/platform-support.html) page describes, every change in the Rust repository must pass full tests on every tier 1 target before it can be merged. This target was introduced as tier 2 back in Rust 1.49, making it available in `rustup`. This new milestone puts the `aarch64-apple-darwin` target on par with the AArch64 Linux and the X86 macOS, Linux, and Windows targets.
```

#### Mac Catalyst targets are now Tier 2

[Mac Catalyst](https://developer.apple.com/mac-catalyst/) is a technology by Apple that allows running iOS applications natively on the Mac. This is especially useful when testing iOS-specific code, as `cargo test --target=aarch64-apple-ios-macabi --target=x86_64-apple-ios-macabi` mostly just works (in contrast to the usual iOS targets, which need to be bundled using external tooling before they can be run on a native device or in the simulator).

[The targets](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/rustc/platform-support/apple-ios-macabi.html) are now tier 2, and can be downloaded with `rustup target add aarch64-apple-ios-macabi x86_64-apple-ios-macabi`, so now is an excellent time to update your CI pipeline to test that your code also runs in iOS-like environments.

> ### Minimal exhaustive patterns
> 
> Empty patterns can now be omitted in common cases:

Reviewer 3: It seems to me that this section heading isn't very clear. It's true that the feature name is `min_exhaustive_patterns`, but the name doesn't really communicate what this is, particularly because the obvious interpretation of “exhaustive” is in the sense that “`match`es must be exhaustive”, which is *already* true, so saying “[Rust now allows] exhaustive patterns” is odd.

```suggestion
### Omitting empty types in pattern matching

Patterns which match empty (a.k.a. uninhabited) types by value can now be omitted:
```

Reviewer 5: I agree with all your comments on this section (I'm the one who wrote the original text) 👍

```rust
use std::convert::Infallible;

> pub fn safe_unwrap<T>(x: Result<T, Infallible>) -> T {

Reviewer 3: Let’s not contribute to the confusion of “safe” with “doesn’t panic” or “correct”, and avoid using it except in the formal sense:

```suggestion
pub fn unwrap_without_panic<T>(x: Result<T, Infallible>) -> T {
```

    let Ok(x) = x; // the `Err` case does not need to appear
    x
}
```

This works with empty types such as a variant-less `enum Void {}`, or structs and enums with a visible empty field and no `#[non_exhaustive]` attribute. It will also be particularly useful in combination with the never type `!`, although that type is still unstable at this time.

> This feature is "minimal" because there are still some exclusions at this time. For reasons related to uninitialized values and unsafe code, omitting patterns is not allowed if the empty type is accessed through a reference, pointer, or union field:

Reviewer 3: This suggestion goes with my earlier rewording of the section heading which removed “minimal”, and doesn't make sense otherwise:

```suggestion
There are still some cases where empty patterns must still be written. For reasons related to uninitialized values and unsafe code, omitting patterns is not allowed if the empty type is accessed through a reference, pointer, or union field:
```

```rust

> pub fn safe_unwrap_ref<T>(x: &Result<T, Infallible>) -> &T {

Reviewer 3: Same rationale as previous: let’s not use “safe” informally.

```suggestion
pub fn unwrap_ref_without_panic<T>(x: &Result<T, Infallible>) -> &T {
```

    match x {
        Ok(x) => x,

>         // this branch cannot be omitted because of the reference

Reviewer 3: Syntactically, `match`es have arms, not branches; branching is what the `match` _does_. Arguably "branch" is also correct here but it's unnecessarily non-specific.

```suggestion
        // this arm cannot be omitted because of the reference
```

        Err(infallible) => match *infallible {},
    }
}
```

> To avoid interfering with crates that wish to support several rust versions, branches with empty patterns are not yet warned as "unreachable", despite the fact that they can be removed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To avoid interfering with crates that wish to support several Rust versions, `match` arms with empty patterns are not yet reported as “unreachable code” warnings, despite the fact that they can be removed.
```

### Floating-point NaN semantics and `const`

Operations on floating-point values (of type `f32` and `f64`) are famously subtle. One of the reasons for this is the existence of "NaN values": this is short for "Not a Number", and is used to represent e.g. the result of `0.0 / 0.0`. What makes NaN values subtle is that more than one possible NaN value exists: a NaN value has a sign that can be checked with `f.is_sign_positive()`, and it has a "payload" that can be extracted with `f.to_bits()`. Despite very successful efforts to standardize the behavior of floating-point operations across hardware architectures, the details of when a NaN is positive or negative and what its exact payload is differ across architectures. To make matters even more complicated, Rust and its LLVM backend apply optimizations to floating-point operations when the exact numeric result is guaranteed not to change, but those optimizations can change which NaN value is produced. For instance, `f * 1.0` may be optimized to just `f`. However, if `f` is a NaN, this can change the exact bit pattern of the result!

> With this release, Rust standardizes on a set of rules for how NaN values behave. This set of rules is *not* fully deterministic, which means that the result of operations like `(0.0 / 0.0).is_sign_positive()` can differ depending on the hardware architecture, optimization levels, and the surrounding code. Code that aims to be fully portable should avoid using `to_bits` and should use `f.signum() == 1.0` instead of `f.is_sign_positive()`. However, the rules are carefully chosen to still allow advanced optimization techniques such as NaN boxing to be realized in Rust code. For more details on what the exact rules are, check out our [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.f32.html#nan-bit-patterns).

Reviewer 3: I think “optimization” isn’t a good word to use here because it sounds like Rust might be _automatically_ NaN-boxing things someday.

```suggestion
With this release, Rust standardizes on a set of rules for how NaN values behave. This set of rules is *not* fully deterministic, which means that the result of operations like `(0.0 / 0.0).is_sign_positive()` can differ depending on the hardware architecture, optimization levels, and the surrounding code. Code that aims to be fully portable should avoid using `to_bits` and should use `f.signum() == 1.0` instead of `f.is_sign_positive()`. However, the rules are carefully chosen to still allow advanced data representation techniques such as NaN boxing to be implemented in Rust code. For more details on what the exact rules are, check out our [documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.f32.html#nan-bit-patterns).
```

With the semantics for NaN values settled, this release also permits the use of floating-point operations in `const fn`. Due to the reasons described above, operations like `(0.0 / 0.0).is_sign_positive()` can produce a different result when executed at compile-time vs at run-time; this is not a bug and code must not rely on a `const fn` always producing the exact same result.

### Native syntax for creating a raw pointer

> Unsafe code sometimes has to deal with pointers that may dangle, may be misaligned, or may not point to valid data. A common case where this comes up are packed structs. In such a case, it is important to avoid creating a reference, as that would cause undefined behavior. This means the usual `&` and `&mut` operators cannot be used, as those create a reference -- even if the reference is immediately cast to a raw pointer, it's too late to avoid the undefined behavior.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unsafe code sometimes has to deal with pointers that may dangle, may be misaligned, or may not point to valid data. A common case where this comes up are `repr(packed)` structs. In such a case, it is important to avoid creating a reference, as that would cause undefined behavior. This means the usual `&` and `&mut` operators cannot be used, as those create a reference -- even if the reference is immediately cast to a raw pointer, it's too late to avoid the undefined behavior.
```

     let static_mut_ptr = std::ptr::addr_of_mut!(STATIC_MUT);
     let extern_static_ptr = &raw const EXTERN_STATIC;
}
```

In an expression context, `STATIC_MUT` and `EXTERN_STATIC` are [place expressions](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions.html#place-expressions-and-value-expressions). Previously, the compiler's safety checks were not aware that the raw ref operator did not actually affect the operand's place, treating it as a possible read or write to a pointer. No unsafety is actually present, however, as it just creates a pointer.

Relaxing this may cause problems where some unsafe blocks are now reported as unused if you deny the `unused_unsafe` lint, but they are now only useful on older versions. Annotate these unsafe blocks with `#[allow(unused_unsafe)]` if you wish to support multiple versions of Rust, as in this example diff:

```diff
 static mut STATIC_MUT: Type = Type::new();
 fn main() {
+    #[allow(unused_unsafe)]
     let static_mut_ptr = unsafe { std::ptr::addr_of_mut!(STATIC_MUT) };
 }
```

A future version of Rust is expected to generalize this to other expressions which would be safe in this position, not just statics.

### Unsafe attributes

> Some Rust attributes, such as `no_mangle`, can be used to [cause Undefined Behavior without any `unsafe` block](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/28179). If this was regular code we would require them to be placed in an `unsafe {}` block, but so far attributes have not had comparable syntax. To reflect the fact that these attributes can undermine Rust's safety guarantees, they are now considered "unsafe" and should be written as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some Rust attributes, such as [`no_mangle`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/abi.html#the-no_mangle-attribute), can be used to [cause Undefined Behavior without any `unsafe` block](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/28179). If this was regular code we would require them to be placed in an `unsafe {}` block, but so far attributes have not had comparable syntax. To reflect the fact that these attributes can undermine Rust's safety guarantees, they are now considered "unsafe" and should be written as follows:
```

- [`core::arch::wasm32::f64x2_relaxed_max`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/arch/wasm32/fn.f64x2_relaxed_max.html)
- [`core::arch::wasm32::i16x8_relaxed_q15mulr`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/arch/wasm32/fn.i16x8_relaxed_q15mulr.html)
- [`core::arch::wasm32::u16x8_relaxed_q15mulr`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/arch/wasm32/fn.u16x8_relaxed_q15mulr.html)
- [`core::arch::wasm32::i16x8_relaxed_dot_i8x16_i7x16`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/arch/wasm32/fn.i16x8_relaxed_dot_i8x16_i7x16.html)
- [`core::arch::wasm32::u16x8_relaxed_dot_i8x16_i7x16`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/arch/wasm32/fn.u16x8_relaxed_dot_i8x16_i7x16.html)
- [`core::arch::wasm32::i32x4_relaxed_dot_i8x16_i7x16_add`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/arch/wasm32/fn.i32x4_relaxed_dot_i8x16_i7x16_add.html)
- [`core::arch::wasm32::u32x4_relaxed_dot_i8x16_i7x16_add`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/core/arch/wasm32/fn.u32x4_relaxed_dot_i8x16_i7x16_add.html)

These APIs are now stable in const contexts:

- [`std::task::Waker::from_raw`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/task/struct.Waker.html#method.from_raw)

> - [`std::task::Waker::waker`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/task/struct.Waker.html#method.from_raw)

Reviewer 6: The link is bad here, and the `Waker::waker` function doesn't seem to exist

Author: Thanks, I'm guessing that was a copy-paste error, which also needs to be fixed in the release notes.
```suggestion
```

```rust
use std::convert::Infallible;
pub fn unwrap_without_panic<T>(x: Result<T, Infallible>) -> T {
    let Ok(x) = x; // the `Err` case does not need to appear
    x
}
```

This works with empty types such as a variant-less `enum Void {}`, or structs and enums with a visible empty field and no `#[non_exhaustive]` attribute. It will also be particularly useful in combination with the never type `!`, although that type is still unstable at this time.

There are still some cases where empty patterns must still be written. For reasons related to uninitialized values and unsafe code, omitting patterns is not allowed if the empty type is accessed through a reference, pointer, or union field:

```rust
pub fn unwrap_ref_without_panic<T>(x: &Result<T, Infallible>) -> &T {
    match x {
        Ok(x) => x,
        // this arm cannot be omitted because of the reference
        Err(infallible) => match *infallible {},
    }
}
```

To avoid interfering with crates that wish to support several Rust versions, `match` arms with empty patterns are not yet reported as “unreachable code” warnings, despite the fact that they can be removed.

### Floating-point NaN semantics and `const`

> Operations on floating-point values (of type `f32` and `f64`) are famously subtle. One of the reasons for this is the existence of "NaN values": this is short for "not a number", and is used to represent e.g. the result of `0.0 / 0.0`. What makes NaN values subtle is that more than one possible NaN value exists: a NaN value has a sign that can be checked with `f.is_sign_positive()`, and it has a "payload" that can be extracted with `f.to_bits()`. Despite very successful efforts to standardize the behavior of floating-point operations across hardware architectures, the details of when a NaN is positive or negative and what its exact payload is differ across architectures. To make matters even more complicated, Rust and its LLVM backend apply optimizations to floating-point operations when the exact numeric result is guaranteed not to change, but those optimizations can change which NaN value is produced. For instance, `f * 1.0` may be optimized to just `f`. However, if `f` is a NaN, this can change the exact bit pattern of the result!

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Operations on floating-point values (of type `f32` and `f64`) are famously subtle. One of the reasons for this is the existence of "NaN values": this is short for "not a number", and is used to represent e.g. the result of `0.0 / 0.0`. What makes NaN values subtle is that more than one possible NaN value exists: a NaN value has a sign that can be checked with `f.is_sign_positive()`, and it has a "payload" that can be extracted with `f.to_bits()` -- however, both are entirely ignored by `==` (which always returns `false` on a NaN). Despite very successful efforts to standardize the behavior of floating-point operations across hardware architectures, the details of when a NaN is positive or negative and what its exact payload is differ across architectures. To make matters even more complicated, Rust and its LLVM backend apply optimizations to floating-point operations when the exact numeric result is guaranteed not to change, but those optimizations can change which NaN value is produced. For instance, `f * 1.0` may be optimized to just `f`. However, if `f` is a NaN, this can change the exact bit pattern of the result!
```
Upon re-reading this I felt like it would be good to clarify this.
